src/site/markdown/index.md, before:

                  
# Spf4j (Simple performance framework for java)
                  

## 1. Overview

 The spf4j library is a collection of utilities and components to monitor, troubleshoot and fix performance issues.
 This library also contains useful general purpose utilities and components that are currently not available in 
 high quality form in other OS libraries (Retry utils, object pool...)
 This library also contains ZEL, a simple expression language that can be easily used in any java application.
 Zel is easy to extend to your needs and also has some cool features like async functions, memorization...
 You can learn more by checking out the [spf4j-zel](http://www.spf4j.org/spf4j-zel/index.html) module.

## 2. License

 This library is [LGPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html) licensed.

 Contributions/Contributors to spf4j are welcome.

## 3. Code, Binaries, Build

 [SPF4J Google hosted repo](http://code.google.com/p/spf4j/)

 [SPF4J Github hosted repo](https://github.com/zolyfarkas/spf4j/)

 [Maven Repository](http://www.zoltran.com/maven2/)

 [![Coverity Badge](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/3158/badge.svg)](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/3158)

 [![CI badge](https://travis-ci.org/zolyfarkas/spf4j.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/zolyfarkas/spf4j)

## 4. Performance monitoring

### 4.1. Why not use jamon, metrics, netflix servo ?

  Observing a system changes the system. The goal of this library is to minimize the observer effect.
  The code in spf4j is carefully written to be as high performance as possible,
  it should outperform all competing libraries on any modern JVM(implementing biased locking)
  running on a CCNUMA system.

### 4.2. How to record measurements?

#### 4.2.1 Via API

   * Low impact with log linear quantized recording for Gauge type of measurements:

```
private static final MeasurementRecorder recorder 
                     = RecorderFactory.createScalableQuantizedRecorder(forWhat, unitOfMeasurement,
                     sampleTime, factor, lowerMagnitude, higherMagnitude, quantasPerMagnitude);
…
recorder.record(measurement);
```

   This is ideal for recording execution times and provides the most detail. 
   (Min, max, avg, and detailed distribution heat chart)
   If distribution chart is not needed createScalableMinMaxAvgRecorder is available with less overhead.

   * Low impact with simple counting for Counters.

```
private static final MeasurementRecorder recorder 
                     = RecorderFactory.createScalableCountingRecorder(forWhat, unitOfMeasurement, sampleTimeMillis);
…
recorder.record(measurement);
```

    This is ideal for measurements like bytesSent, bytesReceived.


   * Dynamic with log linear quantized recording for Gauge type of measurements.

```
private static final MeasurementRecorderSource recorderSource
                    = RecorderFactory.createScalableQuantizedRecorderSource( forWhatCategory, unitOfMeasurement,
                      sampleTime, factor, lowerMagnitude, higherMagnitude, quantasPerMagnitude);
…
recorderSource.getRecorder(forWhat).record(measurement)
```

    As with the low impact static recorders there are dynamic equivalents:
    createScalableMinMaxAvgRecorderSource and createScalableCountingRecorderSource


 You can also create a monitored callable and call it of pass it to a executor like :

```
Callable<?> monitoredCallable = 
     performanceMonitoredCallable(recorderSource, warnMillis, errorMillis, callable, "myCallable").call()
```


#### 4.2.2 Via Annotations

 Annotate a method you want to measure and monitor performance with the annotation:

```
@PerformanceMonitor(warnThresholdMillis=1, errorThresholdMillis=100, recorderSource = RecorderSourceInstance.Rs5m.class)
```

 Start your jvm with Aspectj load time weaver:

```
-javaagent:${project.build.directory}/lib/aspectjweaver-${aspectj.version}.jar
```

 Make sure your aspectj config file (META-INF/aop.xml) contains:

```
<aspectj>
<aspects>
<aspect name="org.spf4j.perf.aspects.PerformanceMonitorAspect"/>
</aspects>
<weaver options="-verbose">
<include within="com.*..*"/>
</weaver>
</aspectj>
```

 This will record the execution times of the annotated method, 
 and will also log (via spf4j) a message containing the call detail and execution time
 if the warn or error thresholds are exceeded. Dynamic quantized recorder source is used.

#### 4.2.3 Where are measurements stored?
 
 You can configure where the measurements are stored via the "perf.ms.config" system property like:

```
  -Dperf.ms.config=TSDB@/path/to/file.tsdb,TSDB_TXT@/path/to/file.tsdbtxt,GRAPHITE_UDP@1.1.1.1:8080,GRAPHITE_TCP@1.1.1.1:8080
```

 TSDB - binary file format (this is the most efficient store)

 TSDB_TXT - text format each line: groupname, timestamp millis, sampletime millis, measurementName1, measurementValue2, ...

 GRAPHITE_UDP - Graphite UDP appender.

 GRAPHITE_TCP - Graphite UDP appender.


### 4.3. How to see the recorded measurements?

** Via JMX 
 
 invoke org.spf4j.perf.impl.ms.tsdb.TSDBMeasurementStore/generateCharts*
 this will generate 2 charts with all the recorded metrics:

*** a) min, max, avg 

![min max avg sample](images/spf4j_min_max_avg.png) sample min, max, avg performance chart with measurement count values/ time axis

*** b) Distribution chart, 

![distribution chart](images/spf4j_dist.png) sample distribution chart

 where on the X axis we have the time, the Y axis we have the recorded values (buckets) and
 the number of measurements recorded that fall in a particular bucket will be represented by the color
 (values to color mapping can be seen in the legend). As you can see this is a log linear chart. 

** Embeded UI.

 The recorded measurements are saved to a TSDB file. Use the library provided UI (spf4j-ui module) to open the file
 and visualize the measurements.

![Explorer UI](images/explorer-ui.png)

### 4.4. How does it work ?

 Measurements are recorded and stored in the Thread local storage.
 At scheduled intervals the measurements aare retrieved, aggregated and stored to a TSDB file.
 Charts are generated using jfreechart library.
 TSDB file can also be opened and measurements viewed with the library embeded UI.

```

[Code context] ---record(value)---> [Thread Local Storage] ----> [Aggregator/Persister] -----> [TSDB]

```

### 4.5 Export any object attribute or operations via JMX

 You can annotate with @JmxExport getters and setters of a attribute or any other method 
 that you want to make available via JMX.
 Here is what you need to do:

```

    public static final class JmxTest {
            
        private volatile String stringVal;

        @JmxExport
        public String getStringVal() {
            return stringVal;
        }

        @JmxExport
        public void setStringVal(final String stringVal) {
            this.stringVal = stringVal;
        }
        
        private static volatile String testStr;

        @JmxExport
        public static String getTestStr() {
            return testStr;
        }

        public static void setTestStr(final String testStr) {
            JmxTest2.testStr = testStr;
        }     
        
    }
...
        JmxTest testObj = new JmxTest();
        Registry.export("test", "Test", testObj);

 
```


## 5. Performance Profiling

### 5.1. Why another profiling library?

 It all started with Brendan Gregg's blog: http://dtrace.org/blogs/brendan/2011/12/16/flame-graphs/ combined with a few hours of coding.
 However since than more monitoring capability has been added to spf4j. Flame-graph visualization has been improved 
 to better see hot function calls... 
 Aspects to monitor object allocation, network, file, memory, garbage collection usage have been added.
 One of the main advantages of spf4j is that it can be easily be used for continuous profiling.
 The captured profile data is persisted to ssdump files which can be opened and visualized with the spf4j UI.

 Due to the use of Thread.getStackTraces() the profile data is safe point biased. 
 For more detail see:  http://sape.inf.usi.ch/sites/default/files/publication/pldi10.pdf,
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yg6_ulhwLw0, https://github.com/RichardWarburton/honest-profiler

### 5.2. When to profile your code?

 I recommend to deploy your code with profiling turned on as much as you can.
 In my case I have profiling data collection turned on in test/qa environments all the time. (with 100ms sampling interval). If you can afford to do it in PROD do it.
 Another good time to profile your code is during your JMH (http://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jmh/) benchmarks.

### 5.3. How to profile your code?

 Add spf4j to your classpath and the following to your command line:

```
${JAVA_HOME}/bin/java [your jvm args] org.spf4j.stackmonitor.Monitor -df [folder to write date] -dp [file prefix] -ss -si 100  -main [your app main class] -- [your app arguments]
```

 This will start your application with profiling enabled, with a 100 ms sampling interval. 
 After the process ends reportFile.html will be generated with a graphic width of 600 pixels. 
 Profiling can also be enabled/disabled via JMX.

 Supported arguments:

```
Usage:
 -df [folder] : dump folder
 -dp [prefix] : dump file prefix
 -di N        : the stack dump to file interval in milliseconds
 -f VAL       : output to this file the perf report, format is HTML
 -main VAL    : the main class name
 -si N        : the stack sampling interval in milliseconds
 -ss          : start the stack sampling thread. (can also be done manually via jmx)
```

 You can also run and control the profiler via its java API:

```
    Sampler SAMPLER = new Sampler(SAMPLE_PERIOD_MSEC);
    SAMPLER.start();
    SAMPLER.stop();
    SampleNode collected = SAMPLER.getStackCollector().clear();
    Converter.saveToFile(fileName, collected);

```

 If you want to profile your JMH benchmarks you can simply add the spf4j JMH profiler to your startup options:

```
        Options opt = new OptionsBuilder()
                .include(".*")
                .addProfiler(JmhProfiler.class)
                .build();
         new Runner(opt).run();

```

 The profiling measurements will be save to file into the current dir. They can be opened and analized with the spf4j-ui.

### 5.4. How to see the profile data?

 After the program finishes it will write the data to the {{{./stackSample.html}stackSample.html}} file

 If you have a server application running and you started it with stack sampling, by default every 1 hour
 the collected stack data is dumped to the temp folder. You can also invoke Sampler.dumpToFile to dum the stack samples 
 at any time in your program allowing you to separate out samples at relevant times in your application.
 You can load and visualize this data with the library embeded ui:

![Flame Graph](images/spf4j-flame-graph.png)

 The classic flame graph visualization remains available. The explorer ui can be used to visualize the measurements 
 stored in the tsdb files. You can also export the measurements to csv format allowing you to analyze them with tools like excel.

![Explorer UI](images/explorer-ui.png)

 in the UI you can filter certain stack traces by right clicking on them and using the filter option in the context menu.

### 5.5. How does it work?

 A sampling thread is started and running in the background. 
 This thread uses Thread.getAllStackTraces() or the JVM MX beans (configurable) to get all stack traces for all threads.
 Each sample is added to a tree that aggregates the stack trace data.

### 5.6. Monitoring memory allocations:

 You will need to apply aspect org.spf4j.memorymonitor.AllocationMonitorAspect
 to the code you want to monitor object allocations. This aspect will intercept all new objects calls in your code
 and it will use performance monitoring described at chapter 4 to record the number and amount of allocations.
 AspectJ load time weaving is not capable of intercepting allocations done inside rt.jar. You will have to apply your
 aspect against rt.jar and create a new one and add it to the boot class path
 in case you want to see all allocations.

 Getting access to the data is same as described in chapter 4, you can do it over jmx, 
 or opening the tsdb file in the embeded ui:

![allocations](images/spf4j_allocations.png)

 Allocations are classified based on the class where they are done. This allows you to quickly identify memory hogs.
 In the chart above you can see how memory allocations happened, both byteSize and allocation count and what class.
 Object size computation might be too much overhead, in that case you can disable it by system property setting:

```
-Dperf.allocations.recordSize=false
```


### 5.7. Monitoring Network IO

 The aspect org.spf4j.iomonitor.NetworkMonitorAspect will allow you to monitor you processes network traffic.

![network traffic](images/spf4j_io.png) network traffic

### 5.8. Monitoring Memory Usage
 
 By calling MemoryUsageSampler.startMemoryUsageSampling(sampleTime) memory usage will be sampled at the provided
 interval. Sampled data ill be aggregated at the interval set by perf.memory.sampleAggMillis system property.
 Data will be stored into a spf4j tsdb where data can be accessed via jmx or the sf4j ui.

### 5.9. Monitoring File Usage
 
 By calling OpenFilesSampler.startFileUsageSampling(sampleTime, warnThreshold, errorThreshold),
 file usage will be sampled at the provided interval. This is usefull to see open files trend and detect file handle
 leaks, which will cause in general outages of your application. The warn and error threshold numbers will long
 details provided by lsof to help you troubleshoot what is going on.
 Sampled data will be aggregated at the interval set by perf.io.openFiles.sampleAggMillis system property.
 Data will be stored into a spf4j tsdb where data can be accessed via jmx or the sf4j ui.


## 6. High Performance Object Pool

### 6.1. Why another object pool implementation?

 In my(I am not alone) view current available object pool implementations are less than perfect. Beside the scalability issues and bugs, I don't like the following implementation choices found in other implementations:

   * 1. Test on borrow is pointless, there is no guarantee that you will get a valid object even if you test on borrow. 
     This encourages the developer to disregard handling of this case when it receives an invalid object. 
     This practice also often is a performance killer.

   * 2. Indiscriminate test on return is not optimal either.
     Test on return should be done only in the case where there is a suspicion that the object is invalid,
     otherwise the performance impact will be too high to be acceptable in most cases.
     Pool client should be able to provide feedback on return for that case.

   * 3. NO exception swallowing.
     If a exception happens with the pooled objects the pool user will know about it and will have to handle it.

 One of the most popular object pool implementations is apache commons-pool with dbcp-pool specialized
 in JDBC object based on it. A lot of people are unhappy with this implementation (including myself),
 so much that the apache tomcat developers wrote their own implementation.
 Here is a comparison of their implementation against dbcp pool:

 http://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-7.0-doc/jdbc-pool.html

 A performance comparison between dbcp, c3p0, and tomcat jdbc pool :

 http://www.tomcatexpert.com/blog/2010/03/22/understanding-jdbc-pool-performance-improvements

 The goal of this implementation is to be more reliable and faster than any of the implementations out there.

### 6.2. Use case

 The classical use case for an object pool is to pool your jdbc connections or any type of network connection.

### 6.3. How to use the object pool

 Creating a pool is simple:

```
RecyclingSupplier<ExpensiveTestObject> pool = new ObjectPoolBuilder(10, new ExpensiveTestObjectFactory()).build();
```

 at minimum you will need to provide the maximum size and the object factory.
 To do something with a object from a pool you will need to:

```
Template.doOnSupplied(new Handler<PooledObject, SomeException>() {
   @Override
   public void handle( PooledObject object, long deadline) throws SomeException {
   object.doStuff();
   }
}, pool, imediateRetries, maxBackoffDelay, timeout );
```

 You can also use the get and recycle methods on the object pool to get and return an object to the pool.

### 6.4. How does the pool work?

 The architecture above biases object to threads, so a thread will most likely get the same object minimizing
 object contention (if pool size >= thread nr which is the recommended sizing). 
 
```
      [code context]  <----> [Thread Local Pool] <----> [Global Pool]                                                       
```

 On the other hand this pool implementation will prefer to create a new connection
 instead of reusing a connection that has already has been used by another thread.
 This is alleviated by the maintenance process which can bring back unused local object to the global pool.

## 7. Other utilities

 Retry utility implementation: see org.spf4j.base.Callables and org.spf4j.concurrent.RetryExecutor

 Union: see org.spf4j.base.Either

 Unique ID and Scalable sequence generators: org.spf4j.concurrent.UIDgenerator and org.spf4j.concurrent.ScalableSequence 

 Csv: org.spf4j.io.Csv

 IPC: org.spf4j.concurrent.FileBasedLock

 RTree: org.spf4j.ds.RTree

 Process control: org.spf4j.base.Runtime

Commit message:

[add] Flight recorder jmh integration.
git-svn-id: https://spf4j.googlecode.com/svn/trunk@566 d408096a-aa36-d13b-a661-48d75a76e993

src/site/markdown/index.md, after:

                  
# Spf4j (Simple performance framework for java)
                  

## 1. Overview

 The spf4j library is a collection of utilities and components to monitor, troubleshoot and fix performance issues.
 This library also contains useful general purpose utilities and components that are currently not available in 
 high quality form in other OS libraries (Retry utils, object pool...)
 This library also contains ZEL, a simple expression language that can be easily used in any java application.
 Zel is easy to extend to your needs and also has some cool features like async functions, memorization...
 You can learn more by checking out the [spf4j-zel](http://www.spf4j.org/spf4j-zel/index.html) module.

## 2. License

 This library is [LGPL](http://www.gnu.org/licenses/lgpl.html) licensed.

 Contributions/Contributors to spf4j are welcome.

## 3. Code, Binaries, Build

 [SPF4J Google hosted repo](http://code.google.com/p/spf4j/)

 [SPF4J Github hosted repo](https://github.com/zolyfarkas/spf4j/)

 [Maven Repository](http://www.zoltran.com/maven2/)

 [![Coverity Badge](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/3158/badge.svg)](https://scan.coverity.com/projects/3158)

 [![CI badge](https://travis-ci.org/zolyfarkas/spf4j.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/zolyfarkas/spf4j)

## 4. Performance monitoring

### 4.1. Why not use jamon, metrics, netflix servo ?

  Observing a system changes the system. The goal of this library is to minimize the observer effect.
  The code in spf4j is carefully written to be as high performance as possible,
  it should outperform all competing libraries on any modern JVM(implementing biased locking)
  running on a CCNUMA system.

### 4.2. How to record measurements?

#### 4.2.1 Via API

   * Low impact with log linear quantized recording for Gauge type of measurements:

```
private static final MeasurementRecorder recorder 
                     = RecorderFactory.createScalableQuantizedRecorder(forWhat, unitOfMeasurement,
                     sampleTime, factor, lowerMagnitude, higherMagnitude, quantasPerMagnitude);
…
recorder.record(measurement);
```

   This is ideal for recording execution times and provides the most detail. 
   (Min, max, avg, and detailed distribution heat chart)
   If distribution chart is not needed createScalableMinMaxAvgRecorder is available with less overhead.

   * Low impact with simple counting for Counters.

```
private static final MeasurementRecorder recorder 
                     = RecorderFactory.createScalableCountingRecorder(forWhat, unitOfMeasurement, sampleTimeMillis);
…
recorder.record(measurement);
```

    This is ideal for measurements like bytesSent, bytesReceived.


   * Dynamic with log linear quantized recording for Gauge type of measurements.

```
private static final MeasurementRecorderSource recorderSource
                    = RecorderFactory.createScalableQuantizedRecorderSource( forWhatCategory, unitOfMeasurement,
                      sampleTime, factor, lowerMagnitude, higherMagnitude, quantasPerMagnitude);
…
recorderSource.getRecorder(forWhat).record(measurement)
```

    As with the low impact static recorders there are dynamic equivalents:
    createScalableMinMaxAvgRecorderSource and createScalableCountingRecorderSource


 You can also create a monitored callable and call it of pass it to a executor like :

```
Callable<?> monitoredCallable = 
     performanceMonitoredCallable(recorderSource, warnMillis, errorMillis, callable, "myCallable").call()
```


#### 4.2.2 Via Annotations

 Annotate a method you want to measure and monitor performance with the annotation:

```
@PerformanceMonitor(warnThresholdMillis=1, errorThresholdMillis=100, recorderSource = RecorderSourceInstance.Rs5m.class)
```

 Start your jvm with Aspectj load time weaver:

```
-javaagent:${project.build.directory}/lib/aspectjweaver-${aspectj.version}.jar
```

 Make sure your aspectj config file (META-INF/aop.xml) contains:

```
<aspectj>
<aspects>
<aspect name="org.spf4j.perf.aspects.PerformanceMonitorAspect"/>
</aspects>
<weaver options="-verbose">
<include within="com.*..*"/>
</weaver>
</aspectj>
```

 This will record the execution times of the annotated method, 
 and will also log (via spf4j) a message containing the call detail and execution time
 if the warn or error thresholds are exceeded. Dynamic quantized recorder source is used.

#### 4.2.3 Where are measurements stored?
 
 You can configure where the measurements are stored via the "perf.ms.config" system property like:

```
  -Dperf.ms.config=TSDB@/path/to/file.tsdb,TSDB_TXT@/path/to/file.tsdbtxt,GRAPHITE_UDP@1.1.1.1:8080,GRAPHITE_TCP@1.1.1.1:8080
```

 TSDB - binary file format (this is the most efficient store)

 TSDB_TXT - text format each line: groupname, timestamp millis, sampletime millis, measurementName1, measurementValue2, ...

 GRAPHITE_UDP - Graphite UDP appender.

 GRAPHITE_TCP - Graphite UDP appender.


### 4.3. How to see the recorded measurements?

** Via JMX 
 
 invoke org.spf4j.perf.impl.ms.tsdb.TSDBMeasurementStore/generateCharts*
 this will generate 2 charts with all the recorded metrics:

*** a) min, max, avg 

![min max avg sample](images/spf4j_min_max_avg.png) sample min, max, avg performance chart with measurement count values/ time axis

*** b) Distribution chart, 

![distribution chart](images/spf4j_dist.png) sample distribution chart

 where on the X axis we have the time, the Y axis we have the recorded values (buckets) and
 the number of measurements recorded that fall in a particular bucket will be represented by the color
 (values to color mapping can be seen in the legend). As you can see this is a log linear chart. 

** Embeded UI.

 The recorded measurements are saved to a TSDB file. Use the library provided UI (spf4j-ui module) to open the file
 and visualize the measurements.

![Explorer UI](images/explorer-ui.png)

### 4.4. How does it work ?

 Measurements are recorded and stored in the Thread local storage.
 At scheduled intervals the measurements aare retrieved, aggregated and stored to a TSDB file.
 Charts are generated using jfreechart library.
 TSDB file can also be opened and measurements viewed with the library embeded UI.

```

[Code context] ---record(value)---> [Thread Local Storage] ----> [Aggregator/Persister] -----> [TSDB]

```

### 4.5 Export any object attribute or operations via JMX

 You can annotate with @JmxExport getters and setters of a attribute or any other method 
 that you want to make available via JMX.
 Here is what you need to do:

```

    public static final class JmxTest {
            
        private volatile String stringVal;

        @JmxExport
        public String getStringVal() {
            return stringVal;
        }

        @JmxExport
        public void setStringVal(final String stringVal) {
            this.stringVal = stringVal;
        }
        
        private static volatile String testStr;

        @JmxExport
        public static String getTestStr() {
            return testStr;
        }

        public static void setTestStr(final String testStr) {
            JmxTest2.testStr = testStr;
        }     
        
    }
...
        JmxTest testObj = new JmxTest();
        Registry.export("test", "Test", testObj);

 
```


## 5. Performance Profiling

### 5.1. Why another profiling library?

 It all started with Brendan Gregg's blog: http://dtrace.org/blogs/brendan/2011/12/16/flame-graphs/ combined with a few hours of coding.
 However since than more monitoring capability has been added to spf4j. Flame-graph visualization has been improved 
 to better see hot function calls... 
 Aspects to monitor object allocation, network, file, memory, garbage collection usage have been added.
 One of the main advantages of spf4j is that it can be easily be used for continuous profiling.
 The captured profile data is persisted to ssdump files which can be opened and visualized with the spf4j UI.

 Due to the use of Thread.getStackTraces() the profile data is safe point biased. 
 For more detail see:  http://sape.inf.usi.ch/sites/default/files/publication/pldi10.pdf,
 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Yg6_ulhwLw0, https://github.com/RichardWarburton/honest-profiler

### 5.2. When to profile your code?

 I recommend to deploy your code with profiling turned on as much as you can.
 In my case I have profiling data collection turned on in test/qa environments all the time. (with 100ms sampling interval). If you can afford to do it in PROD do it.
 Another good time to profile your code is during your JMH (http://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jmh/) benchmarks.

### 5.3. How to profile your code?

 Add spf4j to your classpath and the following to your command line:

```
${JAVA_HOME}/bin/java [your jvm args] org.spf4j.stackmonitor.Monitor -df [folder to write date] -dp [file prefix] -ss -si 100  -main [your app main class] -- [your app arguments]
```

 This will start your application with profiling enabled, with a 100 ms sampling interval. 
 After the process ends reportFile.html will be generated with a graphic width of 600 pixels. 
 Profiling can also be enabled/disabled via JMX.

 Supported arguments:

```
Usage:
 -df [folder] : dump folder
 -dp [prefix] : dump file prefix
 -di N        : the stack dump to file interval in milliseconds
 -f VAL       : output to this file the perf report, format is HTML
 -main VAL    : the main class name
 -si N        : the stack sampling interval in milliseconds
 -ss          : start the stack sampling thread. (can also be done manually via jmx)
```

 You can also run and control the profiler via its java API:

```
    Sampler SAMPLER = new Sampler(SAMPLE_PERIOD_MSEC);
    SAMPLER.start();
    SAMPLER.stop();
    SampleNode collected = SAMPLER.getStackCollector().clear();
    Converter.saveToFile(fileName, collected);

```

 If you want to profile your JMH benchmarks you can simply add the spf4j JMH profiler to your startup options:

```
        Options opt = new OptionsBuilder()
                .include(".*")
                .addProfiler(JmhProfiler.class)
                .build();
         new Runner(opt).run();

```

 The profiling measurements will be save to file into the current dir. They can be opened and analized with the spf4j-ui.

 Spf4j contains also a JMH Profiler integration for Java Flight Recorder, to use it all you need to do is:

```
        Options opt = new OptionsBuilder()
                .include(".*")
                .addProfiler(JmhFlightRecorderProfiler.class)
                .build();
         new Runner(opt).run();

```
 Java flight recorder should not have the safe point bias that spf4j has, however java flight recorder is a commercial
 feature that requires a license from Oracle for production use.
 For production use spf4j profiler is a zero cost alternative, which due to its simplicity should be a more
 reliable option as well.


### 5.4. How to see the profile data?

 After the program finishes it will write the data to the {{{./stackSample.html}stackSample.html}} file

 If you have a server application running and you started it with stack sampling, by default every 1 hour
 the collected stack data is dumped to the temp folder. You can also invoke Sampler.dumpToFile to dum the stack samples 
 at any time in your program allowing you to separate out samples at relevant times in your application.
 You can load and visualize this data with the library embeded ui:

![Flame Graph](images/spf4j-flame-graph.png)

 The classic flame graph visualization remains available. The explorer ui can be used to visualize the measurements 
 stored in the tsdb files. You can also export the measurements to csv format allowing you to analyze them with tools like excel.

![Explorer UI](images/explorer-ui.png)

 in the UI you can filter certain stack traces by right clicking on them and using the filter option in the context menu.

### 5.5. How does it work?

 A sampling thread is started and running in the background. 
 This thread uses Thread.getAllStackTraces() or the JVM MX beans (configurable) to get all stack traces for all threads.
 Each sample is added to a tree that aggregates the stack trace data.

### 5.6. Monitoring memory allocations:

 You will need to apply aspect org.spf4j.memorymonitor.AllocationMonitorAspect
 to the code you want to monitor object allocations. This aspect will intercept all new objects calls in your code
 and it will use performance monitoring described at chapter 4 to record the number and amount of allocations.
 AspectJ load time weaving is not capable of intercepting allocations done inside rt.jar. You will have to apply your
 aspect against rt.jar and create a new one and add it to the boot class path
 in case you want to see all allocations.

 Getting access to the data is same as described in chapter 4, you can do it over jmx, 
 or opening the tsdb file in the embeded ui:

![allocations](images/spf4j_allocations.png)

 Allocations are classified based on the class where they are done. This allows you to quickly identify memory hogs.
 In the chart above you can see how memory allocations happened, both byteSize and allocation count and what class.
 Object size computation might be too much overhead, in that case you can disable it by system property setting:

```
-Dperf.allocations.recordSize=false
```


### 5.7. Monitoring Network IO

 The aspect org.spf4j.iomonitor.NetworkMonitorAspect will allow you to monitor you processes network traffic.

![network traffic](images/spf4j_io.png) network traffic

### 5.8. Monitoring Memory Usage
 
 By calling MemoryUsageSampler.startMemoryUsageSampling(sampleTime) memory usage will be sampled at the provided
 interval. Sampled data ill be aggregated at the interval set by perf.memory.sampleAggMillis system property.
 Data will be stored into a spf4j tsdb where data can be accessed via jmx or the sf4j ui.

### 5.9. Monitoring File Usage
 
 By calling OpenFilesSampler.startFileUsageSampling(sampleTime, warnThreshold, errorThreshold),
 file usage will be sampled at the provided interval. This is usefull to see open files trend and detect file handle
 leaks, which will cause in general outages of your application. The warn and error threshold numbers will long
 details provided by lsof to help you troubleshoot what is going on.
 Sampled data will be aggregated at the interval set by perf.io.openFiles.sampleAggMillis system property.
 Data will be stored into a spf4j tsdb where data can be accessed via jmx or the sf4j ui.


## 6. High Performance Object Pool

### 6.1. Why another object pool implementation?

 In my(I am not alone) view current available object pool implementations are less than perfect. Beside the scalability issues and bugs, I don't like the following implementation choices found in other implementations:

   * 1. Test on borrow is pointless, there is no guarantee that you will get a valid object even if you test on borrow. 
     This encourages the developer to disregard handling of this case when it receives an invalid object. 
     This practice also often is a performance killer.

   * 2. Indiscriminate test on return is not optimal either.
     Test on return should be done only in the case where there is a suspicion that the object is invalid,
     otherwise the performance impact will be too high to be acceptable in most cases.
     Pool client should be able to provide feedback on return for that case.

   * 3. NO exception swallowing.
     If a exception happens with the pooled objects the pool user will know about it and will have to handle it.

 One of the most popular object pool implementations is apache commons-pool with dbcp-pool specialized
 in JDBC object based on it. A lot of people are unhappy with this implementation (including myself),
 so much that the apache tomcat developers wrote their own implementation.
 Here is a comparison of their implementation against dbcp pool:

 http://tomcat.apache.org/tomcat-7.0-doc/jdbc-pool.html

 A performance comparison between dbcp, c3p0, and tomcat jdbc pool :

 http://www.tomcatexpert.com/blog/2010/03/22/understanding-jdbc-pool-performance-improvements

 The goal of this implementation is to be more reliable and faster than any of the implementations out there.

### 6.2. Use case

 The classical use case for an object pool is to pool your jdbc connections or any type of network connection.

### 6.3. How to use the object pool

 Creating a pool is simple:

```
RecyclingSupplier<ExpensiveTestObject> pool = new ObjectPoolBuilder(10, new ExpensiveTestObjectFactory()).build();
```

 at minimum you will need to provide the maximum size and the object factory.
 To do something with a object from a pool you will need to:

```
Template.doOnSupplied(new Handler<PooledObject, SomeException>() {
   @Override
   public void handle( PooledObject object, long deadline) throws SomeException {
   object.doStuff();
   }
}, pool, imediateRetries, maxBackoffDelay, timeout );
```

 You can also use the get and recycle methods on the object pool to get and return an object to the pool.

### 6.4. How does the pool work?

 The architecture above biases object to threads, so a thread will most likely get the same object minimizing
 object contention (if pool size >= thread nr which is the recommended sizing). 
 
```
      [code context]  <----> [Thread Local Pool] <----> [Global Pool]                                                       
```

 On the other hand this pool implementation will prefer to create a new connection
 instead of reusing a connection that has already has been used by another thread.
 This is alleviated by the maintenance process which can bring back unused local object to the global pool.

## 7. Other utilities

 Retry utility implementation: see org.spf4j.base.Callables and org.spf4j.concurrent.RetryExecutor

 Union: see org.spf4j.base.Either

 Unique ID and Scalable sequence generators: org.spf4j.concurrent.UIDgenerator and org.spf4j.concurrent.ScalableSequence 

 Csv: org.spf4j.io.Csv

 IPC: org.spf4j.concurrent.FileBasedLock

 RTree: org.spf4j.ds.RTree

 Process control: org.spf4j.base.Runtime
